 
 
 
 
DECISION OF THE HEAD OF THE HALAL PRODUCT ASSURANCE BOARD 
NUMBER 57 OF 2021  
CONCERNING THE   
CRITERIA OF HALAL PRODUCT   
WITH THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY  
HEAD OF THE HALAL PRODUCT ASSURANCE BOARD ,  
Considering  : a. that in order to guarantee the process of halal products in 
accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations related to 
halal product guarantees, it is necessary to stipulate the Criteria 
for the Halal Product Assurance System;  
 b. that based o n the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is 
necessary to stipulate a Decree of the Head of the Halal Product 
Guarantee Agency concerning the Criteria for the Halal Product 
Assurance System;  
In view of  : 1. Law Number 18 of 2012 concerning Food (State Gazette of 
the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 227, Supplement the 
State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5360);  
2. Law Number 33 of 2014 concerning Guarantee of Halal 
Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 
Number 295, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of 
Indonesia Number 5604);  
3. Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State 
Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, 
Supplement the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 
Number 6573) ;
4. Government Regulation Number 39 of 2021 concerning the 
implementation of Product Warranty Halal (State Gazette of the 
Republic of Indonesia 2021 Number 49, Suppleme ntary Sheet 
Republic of Indonesia Number 6651);  
5. Presidential Regulation No.83 of 2015 concerning The Ministry 
of Religion (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 
Number 168);  

2 
 
 
 6. Regulation of the Minister of Religion Number 42 of 2016 
conce rning Organization and Work Procedure of the Ministry of 
Religion (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 
Number 1495);  
7. Regulation of the Minister of Religion Number 26 of 2019 
concerning the Implementation of Halal Product Guarantee 
(State  Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 
1191);  
8. Decree of the Minister of Religion Number 982 of 2019 
concerning Halal Certification Services;  
9. Decree of the Minister of Religion Number 464 of 2020 
concerning Types of Products that Must Be Certified Halal;  
10. Regulation of the Food and Drug Supervisory Agency Number 
28 of 2019 concerning Auxiliary Materials in Food Processing 
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 
1213);  
DECIDE  
To stipulate   : DECISION OF THE HEAD OF THE HALAL PRODUCT 
ASSURANCE IMPLEMENTING AGENCY CONCERNING THE 
CRITERIA OF THE HALAL PRODUCT ASSURANCE SYSTEM;  
FIRST  : Establishing the Criteria for the Halal Product Assurance 
System as listed in the Appendix which is an integral part of the 
Decision  
SECOND      : The Halal Product Assurance System as referred to in the 
FIRST Dictum is one of the requirements to obtain a halal 
certificate;  
THIRD  : To maintain the sustainability of PPH, business actors shall 
apply the Halal Product Assurance System Criteria;  
FOURTH  : Documents of the Halal Assurance System that already 
existed before the Decree of the Head of this Agency was issued, 
are declared to be still recognized and must comply with the 
provisions of this Decision of the Head o f the Agency within a 
maximum period of 3 (three) years as of the stipulation of this 
Decision of the Head of the Agency;  
FIFTH        : This Decision shall take effect on the date specified.  
 
3 
 
 
 Set in Jakarta  
On a Date 20 Mei 2021  
HEAD OF  
HALAL PRODUCT ASSURANCE AGENCY  
 
 
   MASTUKI  
 
  
4 
 
 
 Appendix  
DECISION OF THE HEAD OF HALAL PRODUCT 
ASSURANCE AGENCY  
NUMBER 57 YEAR 2021  
ABOUT  
HALAL PRODUCT GUARANTEE SYSTEM CRITERIA  
 
 
CHAPTER I  
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
A. Background  
There is not a single muamalah  activity that can be separated from the 
need for  a product, while a Muslim must be bound by law syara' (laws of 
Islam) about halal products. Islam provides rules regarding the 
consumption of products, in one of the His command is to consume halal 
and thoy yib products. As in the Qur'an Surah Al Baqarah [2]:168:  
ي َا أ يُّه ا النَّاس َ ك ل وا مِمَّا فِي اْلأ رأضَِ  ح َل لًَ ط ي ِبًا و ل َ ت تَّبِع وا خ ط و اتَِ الشَّيأط انَِ  ۚ َ إِنَّه َ ل ك مأَ ع د و َ م بِين َ 
"O you mankind! Eat of whatever is in the earth lawful and good; and do not 
closely follow the steps of Ash -shaytan; (The ever -vicious, i.e; the Devil) surely 
he is an evident enemy to you " 
Based on Article 65 of Government Regulation Number 39 of 2021 
conce rning the Implementation of the Halal Product Assurance Sector, in 
order to maintain the continuity of the halal product process, business actors 
are required to implement halal product assurance system.  
Business actors are required to apply all criteria f or a halal product 
guarantee system that uses the principles of protection, justice, legal 
certainty, accountability and transparency, effectiveness and efficiency, 
professionalism, as well as added value and competitiveness.  
The halal product assurance sy stem is an integrated systematic approach 
that is compiled, implemented and maintained by identifying ingredients and 
materials contamination of materials in the production process, products, 
resources and procedures in order to ensure and maintain the con tinuity of 
the halal product process in accordance with the requirements set by BPJPH.  
The implementation of a halal product guarantee system in companies is a 
5 
 
 
 requirement in the halal certification process which will guarantee the 
continuity of the halal product process.  
The criteria for this halal product guarantee system are applied in halal 
certification activities to ensure product halalness and maintain the 
continuity of the halal product process in accordance with the applicable 
laws and regulations.   
Business actors are required to apply the criteria for this halal product 
guarantee system along with other reference requirements as stipulated in 
the certification scheme for the conformity assessment of the halal product 
assurance system.  
To make it easier to understand the criteria for this halal product guarantee 
system, a halal product guarantee system structure is established.  
 
B. Scope  
This halal product guarantee system contains criteria for a halal product 
guarantee system and contains the main objectives of implementing a 
halal product assurance system and its principles, namely:  
1. Establish requirements at each stage of the halal product process (from 
materials, processes, to the final product) including slaughtering 
services, material supply, processing, storage, packaging, distribution, 
sales, and product presentation, as well as handling according to 
Islamic law.  
2. Establish requirements and procedures in halal product process 
activities including commitments and responsibiliti es, materials, 
product processes  halal, product, as well as monitoring and evaluation.  
3. Applies to all product categories that must be certified halal, including 
goods and/or services. The categories of goods include food, beverages, 
drugs, cosmetics, chemi cal products, biological products, products of 
genetic engineering, and goods used or exploited. Service categories 
include slaughtering, processing, storage, packaging, distribution, 
sales, and presentation related to food, drink, medicine, and cosmetics.  
4. Applied to all categories of business actors who are subject to the 
obligation of halal certification in accordance with statutory regulations 
for micro, small, medium and large business actors.  
 
C. General Understanding  
6 
 
 
 In this Decision what is meant by:  
1. Criteria for the Halal Product Assurance System, hereinafter 
abbreviated as SJPH Criteria, are the measures that serve as the basis 
for the assessment or determination of halal product guarantees, 
covering five aspects, namely commitment and responsibility , materials, 
halal product processes, products, monitoring, and evaluation.  
2. Halal Product Guarantee, here in after referred to as JPH, is legal 
certainty regarding the halalness of a product as evidenced by a Halal 
Certificate.  
3. Halal Product Assurance Syst em, hereinafter abbreviated as SJPH, is 
an integrated system, compiled, implemented, and maintained to 
regulate materials, production processes, products, resources, and 
procedures in order to maintain process continuity  in halal products.  
4. Products are goo ds and/or services related to food, beverages, drugs, 
cosmetics, chemical products, biological products, genetically 
engineered products, as well as goods used, used, or utilized by the 
public.  
5. Halal products are products that have been declared halal in a ccordance 
with Islamic law.  
6. Halal Product Processing, hereinafter abbreviated as PPH, is a series of 
activities to ensure the halalness of products including the provision of 
materials, processing, storage, packaging, distribution, sales, and 
product prese ntation.  
7. Materials are elements used to make or produce products.  
8. Critical Materials are Materials that have the potential to originate, 
contain, or are mixed with Haram Materials.  
9. Auxiliary materials are materials, excluding equipment, which are not 
norma lly consumed as food, which is used in food processing to fulfill 
certain technological objectives and are not leave residues in the final 
product, but if it is impossible to avoid, the residue and/or its 
derivatives in the final product do not pose a risk  to health and have no 
technological function.  
10. Khamr (alcoholic drink) is any intoxicating drink, whether from wine or 
otherwise, whether cooked or not.  
11. Impure is something that is dirty which is the reason why someone is 
prevented from worshiping Allah SWT and can prevent the validity of 
7 
 
 
 prayer (according to the agreement of scholars).  
12. Halal Certificate is an acknowledgment of the halalness of a product 
issued by the Halal Product Guarantee Agency based on a written halal 
fatwa issued by the Indonesian Ulema Council.  
13. Business actors are individuals or business entities in the form of legal 
entities or non -legal entities that carry out business activities i n the 
territory of Indonesia.  
14. The Indonesian Ulema Council, hereinafter abbreviated as MUI, is a 
forum for deliberation of scholars, zuama, and Muslim scholars.  
15. Halal label is a sign of the halalness of a product.  
16. Halal supervisor is the person who is responsible for PPH.  
17. Product packaging is the material used to contain and/or wrap the 
product, whether in direct contact with the product or not.  
 
D. Principles of Halal Product Assurance System  
The principles used in this Halal Product Assurance System refer to Article 
2 of Law Number 33 of 2014 concerning Halal Product Guarantee, namely:  
1. Protection  
The principle of protection is that in organizing JPH, it aims to protect 
the Muslim community from consuming and using non -halal products.  
2. Justice  
The principle of justice is that in the implementation of JPH, it must 
reflect justice proportionally for every citizen.  
3. Legal certainty  
The principle of legal certainty is that the implementation of JPH aims 
to provide legal certainty regarding the halaln ess of a product as 
evidenced by a Halal Certificate.  
4. Accountability and Transparency  
The principle of accountability and transparency is that every activity 
and the final result of the JPH implementation activities must be 
accountable to the community as the holder of the JPH.  
 
8 
 
 
 CHAPTER II  
HALAL PRODUCT ASSURANCE CRITERIA  
 
Halal Product Assurance System ( Sistem Penjaminan Produk Halal/ SJPH) 
criteria built on five basic principle frameworks (arkan  al-halal) covering 
commitments and responsibilities, materials, PPH, products, monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
The five basic principle frameworks are described in the following figure:  
 
 
The five basic frameworks are as follows :  
 
A. Commitment and Responsibility  
Commitment and responsibility is a written statement from the company's 
top management to always focus on developing and implementing the SJPH 
Criteria and being responsible for minimizing and eliminating everything that 
is not halal, and ad apting to the development of laws and regulations and/or 
MUI fatwas.  
The company's top management provides commitment and responsibility in 
the form of establishing halal policies and correcting them when non -
conformances with requirements are found.  
Commitment and responsibility include the elements as follows:  

9 
 
 
 1. Halal Policy  
Halal policy is a written statement, commitment of business 
actors/top management of the company to use halal materials, process 
halal products, and produce halal products in accordance with the 
general requirements for halal certification in a sustainable and 
consistent manner. Halal policies of business actors include:  
a. establish a halal policy;   
b. implement halal policies consistently;  
c. ensure that the established halal policy i s understood and 
implemented by all personnel in the organization; and  
d. socialize and communicate policies to all relevant parties 
(stakeholders).  
2. Top management is responsible for:  
a. ensure the availability of adequate resources for the preparation, 
implementation and continuous improvement of the SJPH;  
b.  establish and register a Halal Supervisor;  
c. ensure that all personnel maintain halal integrity in the company 
including suppliers and distributors;  
d. establish a halal management team and/or  Halal Supervisor for micro 
and small -scale Business Actors facilitated by other parties such as 
community organizations, government agencies, business entities, or 
universities.  
3.  Human Resources Development  
The company provides guidance through training a nd/or 
competency improvement in the halal field. The training is carried out 
according to the needs of the Business Actor.  
a. Halal Supervisor training carried out by BPJPH, tertiary institutions, 
and/or other accredited training institutions in accordance wi th the 
provisions of laws and regulations and implemented by BPJPH;  
b. Personnel training tailored to the needs of the implementation of SJPH; 
and 
c. The company must have and implement training procedures and 
maintain evidence of their implementation.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 B. Material  
Materials are elements used to make or produce products required by 
SJPH including: (a) raw material; (b) additives; (c) auxiliary materials (processing 
aid); (d) packaging, lubricants, grease, sanitizers that are in direct contact with 
materials or products; (e) washing aids in direct contact with production facilities 
to manufacture products; and (f) media for validation of the results of washing 
facilities that are in direct contact with materials or products.  
These materials come from  animals, plants, microbes, materials produced 
through chemical processes, biological processes, or genetic engineering 
processes.  
The criteria for the materials used in the PPH are:  
1. Materials used in PPH must be certified halal except for materials that 
are included in the category of non -critical materials (positive list) 
issued by BPJPH;  
2. Materials must not come from:  
a. pigs and their derivatives;  
b. blood;  
c. carcass;  
d. human body parts;  
e. Khamr (alcoholic beverages);  
f. by-products of khamr obtained only by physical s eparation; and  
g. Materials that are not commonly used in industry, such as 
materials from sharp -toothed and clawed animals (dogs, mice, 
crocodiles, and others).  
3. Materials must not be produced from production facilities used to make 
products that use pork or its derivatives as one of the ingredients;  
4. Materials are not mixed with Haram or unclean materials which can 
come from raw materials, processed materials, additional materials, 
and/or auxiliary materials from production facilities; and  
5. Animal materials and  their derivative products must come from halal 
animals, with the following conditions:  
a. All marine animals are halal and do not need to be slaughtered.  
b. The carcasses of lawful animals are the carcasses of fish and 
grasshoppers.  
11 
 
 
 c. land animals consist of halal land animals that must be 
slaughtered according to Islamic sharia as evidenced by Halal 
Certification (for example chickens and poultry, cattle, goats and 
buffalo, etc.) and non -halal land animals (for example pigs, dogs, 
wolves, and others).  
6. Materia ls must meet safety and health aspects according to applicable 
regulations.  
7. Microbial material:  
a. Substances that do not cause infection and intoxication man;  
b. Microbial growth media, additives, and/or Auxiliary materials not 
derived from pork or its derivati ves; 
c. The microbial material obtained without separation from the 
media growth, the growth medium must use Pure and halal 
materials;  
d. The microbial material obtained by separation from the media 
growth, if the growth medium uses Haram and unclean 
ingredients  other than pork and its derivatives, then in the next 
stage of the process the microbial material must go through a 
washing process that meets syar'i rules (thathir syar'an), which 
fulfills the conditions for the addition of water as much as two 
qullah or  the equivalent of 270 liters so that the color and smell 
of the haram material is lost. The required washing of microbial 
products is washing with water in the range after the microbial 
material is harvested until before the microbial product is 
packaged;  and 
e. Microbial materials used to make products with genetic 
engineering methods, the microbial material cannot be inserted 
by genes derived from pigs or man.  
8. Alcohol/ethanol:  
a. Ethanol, also called ethyl alcohol, pure alcohol, absolute alcohol, 
or alcohol, i s a kind of volatile liquid, flammable, colorless, and 
alcohol that is most often used in everyday life.  
b. The alcohol/ethanol does not come from the khamr industry 
(alcoholic beverages);  
c. Ethanol derived and other sources such as from fermentation 
cassava, c orn, or molasses can be used;  
12 
 
 
 d. By-products of the khamr industry (alcoholic beverages) or its 
liquid derivatives which are physically separated may not be used;  
e. Industrial by -products (alcoholic beverages) or their derivatives 
solids, such as brewer's yeast , may be used after a washing 
process that meets the rules syar'i (thathir syar'an);  
f. By-products of the khamr industry (alcoholic beverages) or its 
derivatives can be used if the material/product has been further 
reacted to produce new compounds through ch emical reactions 
or biotransformation (using enzymes or microbes);  
g. Use of non -khamr industrial alcohol/ethanol (good is the result of 
chemical synthesis [and petrochemical] or the product of non -
khamr fermentation industry) for food product ingredients  and 
drinks are allowed if medically not dangerous and as long as the 
alcohol/ethanol (C2H5OH) level in final product is less than 0.5%;  
h. Use of alcohol/ethanol from non -khamr  industries (good is the 
result of chemical synthesis [from petrochemicals] or non -khamr 
fermentation industry) as another product (intermediate product) 
which is not consumed directly for Food and beverage product 
ingredients are allowed if medically harm less and as long as 
alcohol/ethanol (C2H5OH) in the final product is less and 0.5%;  
i. Use of non -khamr industrial alcohol/ethanol (good is the result of 
chemical synthesis [from petrochemicals] or non -khamr 
fermentation industry) in cosmetic products does no t limit levels, 
as long as it is not medically harmful; and  
j. Use of non -originated and industrial alcohol/ethanol khamr  (both 
are the result of chemical synthesis [from petrochemicals] or non -
khamr fermented industrial products) for liquid or non -liquid 
medicinal materials may be legal on the condition that:  
1) No harm to health;  
2) No abuse;  
3) Safe and appropriate dose, and  
4) Not u sed intentionally to get drunk.  
9. The company must have supporting documents in the form of: Halal 
certificate or other supporting documents that can prove that all 
materials used are not included in materials that are critically halal. 
The supporting docume nts must meet the following requirements:  
13 
 
 
 a. Supporting documents for Materials used must be valid and/or 
still valid; and  
b. Supporting documents in the form of a statement of the pork -free 
facility must be issued by the producer, not the 
distributor/supplier.  
10. There are three categories of Materials namely:  
a. Non-critical material,  
Non-critical materials are materials that:  
1) derived from nature in the form of plants and mining materials 
without going through a processing process;  
2) categorized as not at risk of conta ining prohibited materials; 
and 
3) not classified as hazardous materials and not in contact with 
illegal materials.  
The Halal Positive List of Materials will be further determined by 
BPJPH. If the Material uses a trading name that is not the same 
as the name of the Material listed in the list, the Business Actor 
must attach a material specification document.  
b. Critical material,  
Critical Materials are Materials that have the potential to come from, 
contain, or are mixed with Haram materials .  
c. Very critical material,  
The critical ingredient is  
1) Materials derived from slaughtered animals and their 
derivatives, or Materials containing Materials derived from 
slaughtered animals and their derivatives. The list of animal 
ingredients that must be accompanied by a H alal Certificate 
can be seen in the provisions of BPJPH.  
2) Ingredients that are difficult to trace for halal such as cheese, 
whey, lactose, and casein;  
3) Materials containing complex ingredients, in terms of material 
criticality and the complexity of the manu facturing process, 
such as vitamin premix, formula milk, sweetened condensed 
milk, margarine, shortening, non -dairy creamer, seasoned 
flour, butter, biscuits, and processed chocolate;  and  
14 
 
 
 4) Flavor and fragrance.  
11. Companies must have procedures to ensure the validity of 
supporting documents for materials in the form of Halal Certification. 
The guarantee procedure can be in the form of periodic inspection of 
the validity period of the Material Halal Certificate and requesting the 
latest Halal Certificate if the  validity period has expired. Halal 
certificates for materials that have expired are still considered sufficient 
supporting documents if the materials are produced during the validity 
period of the certificate.  
 
C. Halal Product Process (PPH)  
1. Locations, Places, and Tools  
a. Business Actors are required to separate the location, place, and 
equipment of PPH with non -halal product processes. Locations that 
must be separated namely the location of the slaughter;  
b. Business actors are required to separate the location of animal 
slaughter halal with non -halal animals;  
c. Business actors are required to separate the location of the 
slaughter and fulfill the requirements:  
1) physically separated between locations of halal slaughterhouses 
with the location o f the non -halal slaughterhouse;  
2) limited by a wall fence of at least 3 (three) meters to prevent the 
traffic of people, tools, and products between slaughterhouses;  
3) not located in flood -prone areas, polluted with smoke, odors, 
dust, and other contaminants;  
4) have facilities for handling solid and liquid waste that is 
separated from the non -halal slaughterhouse;  
5) the basic construction of the entire building must be able to 
prevent contamination; and  
6) have a separate door for the entry of slaughtered animals with  
the release of carcasses and meat.  
d. Business actors are required to separate the place for slaughtering 
animals Halal with non -halal animals including:  
1) animal shelter;  
2) animal slaughter;  
15 
 
 
 3) skinning;  
4) production of offal;  
5) withering room;  
6) carcass handling;  
7) cooling room; and  
8) waste handling facilities.  
e. Business actors are required to separate the places and tools of PPH 
that are referred to in point 1 (one) including places:  
1) slaughter;  
2) processing;  
3) storage;  
4) packaging;  
5) distribution;  
6) sales; and  
7) presentation.  
f. Business Actors are required to:  
1) maintain the cleanliness and hygiene of the PPH location and 
place;  
2) have a PPH location and place that is free from najis; and  
3) have a location and place for PPH that is free from non -material 
lawful.  
g. Business Actors are required to separate the place of processing 
between Halal and non -halal including:  
1) material storage;  
2) material weighing;  
3) material mixing;  
4) product printing;  
5) product cooking; and/or  
6) other processes that affect food processing.  
h. Business Actors are required to separate the place of storage 
between Halal and non -halal including:  
1) Material acceptance;  
2) product acceptance after processing; and  
3) the means used for the storage of Materials and product  
i. Business Actors are required to separate the place of packaging 
between Halal and non -halal including:  
16 
 
 
 1) Packaging materials used to package products; and  
2) means of product packaging.  
j. Business Actors are required to separate the distribution points 
between Halal and non -halal products inclu ding:  
1) means of transportation from storage to equipment product 
distribution; and  
2) means of transportation for product distribution.  
k. Business Actors are required to separate the place of sale between 
those which Halal and non -halal include:  
1) means of selling  products; and  
2) product sales process.  
l. Business Actors are required to separate the place of presentation 
between those which Halal and non -halal include:  
1) means of presenting halal products; and  
2) product presentation process.  
m. Business Actors are required to separate the place of distribution, 
sale, and presentation of non -halal animal -origin fresh products 
from fresh products of halal animal origin;  
n. Business Actors are required to separate the place of sale and 
presentation of fresh and processed products of animal and non -
animal origin not halal with fresh and processed products of animal 
and non -animal origin halal animal;  
o. Business actors are required to design production sites for 
facilitating proper cleaning and control processes;  
p. Business acto rs are required to have a PPH location that is far from 
pig farming or processing activities, to prevent the occurrence of 
contamination through employees and equipment;  
q. Business actors are required to provide a place for PPH that is free 
from pets and wil d animals;  
r. Business actors are required to separate washing places/facilities 
production equipment between halal and non -halal products; and  
s. Business Actors are required to physically separate display facilities 
between halal and non -halal products.  
2. PPH Eq uipment and Device  
a. Business Actors are required to separate PPH equipment and device 
from non -halal products including tools for slaughtering, 
17 
 
 
 processing, storing, packaging, distributing, selling, and presenting;  
b. Business Actors are required to use slaugh tering equipment that 
meets the following requirements:  
1) Do not use the slaughtering tools interchangeably with those 
used for the slaughter of non -halal animals;  
2) Use different means for halal and non -halal cleaning tools;  
3) Use different facilities for halal  and non -halal in the maintenance 
of tools; and  
4) Have their own tool storage area for halal and non -halal.  
c. Business Actors are required to use processing equipment that 
meets the following requirements:  
1) Do not use processing equipment interchangeably with those 
used for processing non -halal products;  
2) Using different means for halal and non -halal cleaning tools;  
3) Using different facilities for halal and non -halal in the 
maintenance of tools; and  
4) Have their own tool storage area for halal and non -halal.  
d. Business Actors are required to:  
1) Maintain cleanliness and hygiene of PPH equipment;  
2) Ensuring PPH tools are free from najis; and  
3) Ensuring PPH tools are free from non -halal materials.  
e. Business Actors are required to guarantee that every part o f the 
equipment, devices, and machines that come into direct contact 
with PPH are not made of non -halal materials;  
f. Business Actors are obliged to ensure that the use of Materials for 
maintenance of PPH machines, equipment, and equipment is not 
made of non -halal materials;  
g. Business actors are prohibited from using assistive devices made of 
non-halal materials, such as brushes/brushes made of pig bristles;  
h. Business Actors are required to use storage devices that meet the 
following requirements:  
1) do not use storage devices interchangeably with those used 
for storage of non -halal products;  
2) using different means for halal and non -halal cleaning tools;  
3) using different facilities for halal and non -halal in the 
18 
 
 
 maintenance of tools; and  
4) have their own tool storage area for halal and non -halal.  
i. Business Actors are required to use packaging tools that meet the 
following requirements:  
1) do not use packaging too ls interchangeably with those used 
for packaging non -halal products;  
2) using different means for halal and non -halal cleaning tools;  
3) using different facilities for halal and non -halal in the 
maintenance of tools; and  
4) have their own tool storage area for hala l and non -halal.  
j. Business Actors are required to use distribution tools that meet the 
following requirements:  
1) do not use distribution tools interchangeably with those used 
for the distribution of non -halal products;  
2) using different means for halal and non-halal cleaning tools;  
3) using different facilities for halal and non -halal in the 
maintenance of tools; and  
4) have their own tool storage area for halal and non -halal.  
k. Business Actors are required to use sales tools that meet the 
following requirements:  
1) do not use sales tools interchangeably with those used for the 
sale of non -halal products;  
2) using different means for halal and non -halal cleaning tools; 
and 
3) using different facilities for halal and non -halal in the 
maintenance of tools.  
l. Business Actors are r equired to use presentation tools that meet the 
following requirements:  
1) do not use presentation tools interchangeably with those used 
for the presentation of non -halal products;  
2) using different means for halal and non -halal cleaning tools;  
3) using different facilities for halal and non -halal in the 
maintenance of tools; and  
4) have their own tool storage area for halal and non -halal.  
m. Business Actors are required to guarantee that the sampling 
equipment is not contaminated with Halal and non -halal Mater ials 
19 
 
 
 and/or products; and  
n. In the case of production facilities used to produce products that are 
submitted for a Halal Certificate, they are also used to produce 
products that are not submitted for a Certificate  
o. Halal which does not come from Materials con taining prohibited 
Materials, Business Actors must submit the following documents:  
1) product name;  
2) list of products and materials used;  
3) product processing process; and  
4) washing or tanning in production facilities that are used 
together.  
3. PPH Procedure  
a. Business Actors are required to have and implement written and 
documented procedures for implementing PPH as follows:  
1) Ensuring the use of production facilities that are in contact 
with materials and/or intermediate/final products are free 
from severe  najis (mughallazah);  
2) Ensuring the use of the proposed materials and products is 
not contaminated with najis;  
3) Purification of production facilities according to Islamic law;  
4) Use of new materials to be used for halal products;  
5) Material Purchase;  
6) Inspection of the  arrival of Materials;  
7) Production process;  
8) Material and product storage;  
9) Transportation of Materials and products;  
10) Halal traceability;  
11) Handling of products that do not meet the halal criteria;  
12) Product recall;  
13) Product launch/sale;  
14) Product formulation/new product development;  
15) Product display;  
16) Terms of visitors;  
17) Determination of the menu;  
18) Stunning animals; and  
19) Slaughter of animals.  
20 
 
 
 b. Business Actors must socialize PPH procedures to all relevant 
parties;  
c. Business Actors must document evidence of  socialization;  
d. Business Actors must evaluate the effectiveness of PPH procedures 
regularly;  
e. Business Actors must submit evaluation results to the person in 
charge of PPH and related parties;  
f. Business actors must handle products that do not meet the halal 
criteria. products that do not meet the halal criteria are products 
that have been certified but are already produced from materials 
that do not meet the criteria for materials or the criteria for using 
new materials or are produced in facilities that do n ot meet the 
criteria for production facilities;  
g. Business Actors are required to guarantee that products that do not 
meet the criteria are not sold to consumers who require Halal 
products. For products that do not meet the halal criteria, the 
Business Actor  makes withdrawals to prevent products from 
entering the PPH chain and carries out control, including security 
and supervision. If the product has already been sold, then the 
product must be withdrawn.  
1) Products that do not meet the criteria may not be reworked, 
downgraded, or reformulated and claimed as halal products.  
2) Products that do not meet the criteria may not be claimed as 
halal products.  
3) If the product that does not meet the criteria cannot be sold 
to consumers who do not require halal products, then the 
product must be destroyed or used as feed.  
h. Business Actors must have procedures for the identification, and 
analysis of non -halal hazards in their production processes and 
determination of critical points as well as determining preventiv e 
and monitoring measures against these critical points;  
i. Business Actors must determine the necessary corrective and 
preventive actions against the evaluation results and the deadline 
for their completion;  
j. Business actors are required to guarantee the proc edure for washing 
unclean mughallazah that enters the halal production line following 
21 
 
 
 the provisions of Islamic law as follows:  
1) In principle, the purification of an object, including a means 
of production, which is affected by mutawassitah (moderately 
unclean) is done by using water;  
2) The method is sprayed (washed with water 7 times, one of 
which is soil/dust or a substitute with the same cleaning 
power);  
3) Production equipment made of hard objects and does not 
absorb najis (tasyarub), for example, made of iro n or steel, if 
exposed to mutawassitah (moderately unclean), if it is purified 
by using water it will damage the tools and/or the production 
process, then it can be purified. by using other than water, as 
long as the item is pure and the traces of impurity  in the form 
of smell, taste and color have disappeared; and  
4) equipment must not be used alternately between pork and 
non-pork products even though it has been through the 
washing process.  
k. Business Actors must prepare product processing process 
documents,  
  
D. Products  
1. General  
a. Business actors are required to produce products from halal 
materials, processed in a manner according to Islamic law, using 
equipment, production facilities, packaging, storage, and 
distribution systems that are not contaminated with non -halal 
materials;  
b. Business Actor is obliged to guarantee that the product during its 
preparation, processing, packaging, storage and transportation is 
physically separated from other products or materials that are not 
halal following I slamic law;  
c. Business Actors cannot apply for halal certification registration for 
products with product names:  
1) contains the name of an alcoholic beverage;  
2) contains the names of pigs and dogs and their derivatives;  
3) describe disbelief and disobedience;  
22 
 
 
 4) contr ary to Islamic creed; and  
5) contains words that have erotic, vulgar, and/or pornographic 
connotations.  
d. Business Actor cannot perform halal certification of products in the 
form of products of pigs and dogs, or in the form of products or 
packaging labels that  are erotic, vulgar, and/or pornographic;  
e. Business Actors cannot perform halal certification on products with 
sensory characteristics/profiles that tend to smell/taste/aroma that 
leads to haram products or that have been declared haram based on 
fatwa provi sions; and  
f. Business actors must produce products or materials that are safe 
for consumption.  
2. Product Packaging and Labeling  
a. Business actors are required to use packaging materials that are not 
made or contain non -halal materials;  
b. Business Actors must package halal products according to their 
contents;  
c. Products that are repacked or re -labeled can be submitted for 
certification provided that the product has a BPJPH Halal Certificate 
or the product meets the following requirements:  
1) Products are non -critic al materials that are included in the 
positive list;  
2) Products are non -critical materials that are included in the 
positive list which are processed with halal -certified critical 
auxiliary materials; or  
3) sugar and raisins equipped with a BPJPH Halal Certific ate or 
a Halal Certificate issued by another institution that has 
collaborated with BPJPH.  
d. Business Actors must package carcass products using packaging 
that is clean, healthy, odorless, and does not affect the quality and 
safety of meat;  
e. Business actors m ust design packaging, signs, symbols, logos, 
names, and images that are not misleading and/or violate the 
principles of Islamic law;  
f. Halal labels can be included during the Halal Certificate renewal 
process;  
23 
 
 
 g. BPJPH stipulates a nationally valid Halal Label;  
h. The halal label should at least contain:  
1) logos; and  
2) certificate number or registration number.  
i. The logo contains images, text, or a combination of images and text;  
j. Business Actors are required to include the Halal Label following the 
provisions stipulated by BPJPH and still pay attention to the laws 
and regulations related to the label by the commodity;  
k. Business Actors are required to include a Halal Label on products 
that have obtained a Halal Certificate on:  
1) Product packaging;  
2) certain parts of the product; and  
3) a specific place on the product.  
l. Business Actors are required to affix the Halal Label in a place that 
is easy to see and read, and is not easily removed, removed, and 
damaged;  
m. The inclusion of the Halal Label as referred to in paragraph ( 2) is 
excluded for:  
1) Products whose packaging is too small so that it is impossible 
to include all the information;  
2) Products that are sold and packaged directly in front of buyers 
in small quantities; and  
3) Products sold in bulk  
n. The enforcement of the inclusion of the Halal Label is evidenced by 
a Halal Certificate document;  
3. Identification and Traceability  
a. Business Actors are required to provide identification of stored 
products such as date of entry, storage location, code of storage 
place, bar code, d ate of production, and others by the stipulated 
provisions;  
b. Business Actors are required to guarantee the traceability of product 
halalness, that the product originates from materials that meet the 
criteria for materials, criteria for the use of new materi als, and is 
produced in facilities that meet the criteria for facilities;  
c. Business Actors are required to have a documented procedure to 
ensure traceability of the halalness of the certified product;  
24 
 
 
 d. Business Actors are required to guarantee Materials with  the same 
code have the same halal status when applying the Material coding; 
and 
e. Business Actors are required to ensure the traceability of 
information on the origin of Materials in every activity.  
  
E. Monitoring and Evaluation  
1. Business Actors must conduct an internal audit at least once a year to 
monitor the implementation of SJPH;  
2. Business Actors must conduct a management review to evaluate the 
implementation of SJPH;  
3. Business actors must have internal audit procedures and management 
reviews;  
4. Busin ess actors must maintain evidence of the implementation of 
internal audits and management reviews must be maintained; and  
5. Business Actors must report the results of internal audits and 
management reviews following the provisions of the Halal Product 
Assura nce Agency.  
  
25 
 
 
 CHAPTER III  
DOCUMENTED INFORMATION  
  
Documented information is made by Business Actors in implementing SJPH. 
Businessmen:  
a. have documented information on the implementation of SJPH as outlined 
in the halal manual;  
b. maintain records of evidence of implementation of SJPH requirements; 
and 
c. compile a halal manual that is under the industrial scale, organizational 
structure, scope, stages of the production process, risk level, and others 
according to the guidelines and pr ovisions of the BPJPH.  
  
Set in Jakarta  
On May 20, 2021  
HEAD OF  
HALAL PRODUCT ASSURANCE AGENCY  
  
MASTUKI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
